LOAD CSV improvements (#887)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/clauses/load-csv.adoc

:description: `LOAD CSV` is used to import data from CSV files into a Neo4j database.

= LOAD CSV

> `LOAD CSV` is used to import data from CSV files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`LOAD CSV` is used to import data from CSV files into a Neo4j database.
```

Author: added

[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV

> FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/bands/artists.csv' // <1>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LOAD CSV FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/bands/artists.csv' // <1>
```

AS row  // <2>
MERGE (:Artist {name: row[1], year: toInteger(row[2])})  // <3>
----

<1> `FROM` takes a string containing the path where the CSV file is located.
<2> The clause parses one row at a time, temporarily storing the current row in the variable specified with `AS`.

> <3> Use the row variable to access data in subsequent clauses, which may process and insert it into the database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<3> The `row` variable is accessed by the xref:clauses/merge.adoc[`MERGE`] clause to insert data into the database.
```

Author: rephrased for active voice

`LOAD CSV` supports both local and remote URLs.
Local paths are resolved relative to the Neo4j installation folder.

[NOTE]
====

> Your user needs link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/authentication-authorization/load-privileges/[load privileges] to run `LOAD CSV` statements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Loading CSV files requires link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/authentication-authorization/load-privileges/[load privileges].

:description: `LOAD CSV` is used to import data from CSV files.

:url_encoded_link: link:https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/percent-encoding[URL-encoded]

> [[load-csv]]

Reviewer 2: Be aware that there isn't a need to prefix each section with a custom ID. If nothing is specified, a section ID will be generated based on the section title, and can be used as anchor.
For example, the ID `[[load-csv-headers]]` results in a URL like `cypher-manual/5/clauses/load-csv/#load-csv-headers`, whereas without the custom ID it would be `cypher-manual/5/clauses/load-csv/#_headers`. If you use custom IDs, make them shorter: it's less typing and less clutter.

At all rates, custom IDs on top-level sections are ignored, so this one has no effect and should be removed.

= LOAD CSV

[[load-csv-introduction]]
== Introduction

`LOAD CSV` is used to import data from CSV files.

> In this example, the CSV file _artists.csv_ contains a line index, a name and a year for a number of artists:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example loads into the database the name and year information for a number of artists:
```

So that the sentence after the csv block can be removed.

.artists.csv
[source, csv, role="noheader", filename="artists.csv"]
----
1,ABBA,1992
2,Roxette,1986
3,Europe,1979
4,The Cardigans,1992
----

The artist data from _artists.csv_ can be read with `LOAD CSV` like this:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV FROM 'file:///artists.csv' AS row
MERGE (:Artist {name: row[1], year: toInteger(row[2])})
----

> `FROM` expects a string which represents a URL where the CSV file is located.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`FROM` expects a string representing the URL where the CSV file is located.
```

It is required to specify a variable for the CSV data using `AS`.
This variable represents the current row while LOAD CSV iterates through the lines of the CSV file.
This way, the data can then be accessed in subsequent clauses.

> A new node with the `Artist` label is created for each row in the CSV file and values from the two columns of the file are set as properties on the nodes.

Reviewer 2: I think everything from this sentence until the end of the section, except for the result block and the final admonition, should be removed. 
The introduction, if there is a need for it, should be short and should not delay the actual juice of the page. 
The sentence above is self-explanatory by the example+result (you don't run `load csv` if you've never run `merge` ever before, so you know what it's doing); and the remarks below don't hold much informational content. For example, "The CSV file format allows for a number of different flavors, for example, using different field delimiters or optional column headers." is a _true_ statement, but one that does not practically help me loading csv data into neo4j. The same applies to the others: they are _true_ statements, but they only delay the time when they will actually be covered in their own sections.
If those statements contain informational value wrt the _contents_ of the page, then the ToC should be improved.

Author: "if there is a need for it" - is there?
would you say we could drop the introduction altogether?

edit: came up with a minimal introduction setting with general syntax

.Result
[role="queryresult"]
----
+-------------------+
| No data returned. |
+-------------------+
Nodes created: 4
Properties set: 8
Labels added: 4
----

Typically, there are three steps in `LOAD CSV` queries:

* Reading CSV data
* Transforming the CSV data
* Creating nodes and relationships from the CSV data

The CSV file format allows for a number of different flavors, for example, using different field delimiters or optional column headers.
CSV files can be read from different sources, and `LOAD CSV` has a mechanism for handling large amounts of data.

It is possible to import data from multiple CSV files with multiple `LOAD CSV` queries.
Each data set can be transformed as needed in the process, preparing for the creation of nodes and relationships.
Since all CSV data imported via `LOAD CSV` is string data, a common transformation is type casting to specific data types.

[NOTE]
====

> `LOAD CSV` is regulated by the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/authentication-authorization/load-privileges/[load privileges].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Your user needs link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/authentication-authorization/load-privileges/[load privileges] to run `LOAD CSV` statements.
```

====

[[load-csv-file-format]]
== CSV file format

> The Wikipedia article on link:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comma-separated_values[Comma-separated values] summarizes why there are different flavors of the CSV format.

Reviewer 2: It's not important _why_ there are multiple flavors; what matters is that `load csv` can be tweaked to work on csv of different forms.

I think the way it was previously is better, with the leading sentence and the concise list of requirements/supported options. They can then be elaborated upon with further sections and examples as you've done.

A CSV file to use with `LOAD CSV` must have UTF-8 as its character encoding.
The line terminator is system-dependent, for example, it is `\n` for Unix and `\r\n` for Windows.

[[load-csv-headers]]
=== Headers

> If the CSV file starts with a header row containing column names, each subsequent row in the file acts as a map instead of an array of strings when imported:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the CSV file starts with a header row containing column names, each import row acts as a map instead of an array:
```
(it is a map of _strings_ anyway -- if we only mention _strings_ on lists, we may give the impression that some extra parsing is done on maps)

.artists-with-headers.csv
[source, csv, filename="artists-with-headers.csv"]
----
Id,Name,Year
1,ABBA,1992
2,Roxette,1986
3,Europe,1979
4,The Cardigans,1992
----

> Indicate the header row by adding `WITH HEADERS` to the query.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Indicate the presence of the header row by adding `WITH HEADERS` to the query.
```

> This way, you can access specific fields by their corresponding column name:

Reviewer 2: I think merging these two sentences with the one before the csv block makes it quicker to read through, as all text is in one place.

:description: `LOAD CSV` is used to import data from CSV files.

:url_encoded_link: link:https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/percent-encoding[URL-encoded]

[[load-csv]]
= LOAD CSV

[[load-csv-introduction]]
== Introduction

`LOAD CSV` is used to import data from CSV files.

> Here is an example where the CSV file _artists.csv_ contains a line index, a name and a year for a number of artists:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this example, the CSV file _artists.csv_ contains a line index, a name and a year for a number of artists:
```

.artists.csv
[source, csv, role="noheader", filename="artists.csv"]
----
1,ABBA,1992
2,Roxette,1986
3,Europe,1979
4,The Cardigans,1992
----

The artist data from _artists.csv_ can be read with `LOAD CSV` like this:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV FROM 'file:///artists.csv' AS row
MERGE (:Artist {name: row[1], year: toInteger(row[2])})
----

`FROM` expects a string which represents a URL where the CSV file is located.
It is required to specify a variable for the CSV data using `AS`.
This variable represents the current row while LOAD CSV iterates through the lines of the CSV file.
This way, the data can then be accessed in subsequent clauses.

A new node with the `Artist` label is created for each row in the CSV file.

> In addition, values from two columns of the CSV file are set as properties on the nodes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A new node with the `Artist` label is created for each row in the CSV file and values from the two columns of the file are set as properties on the nodes.
```

.Result
[role="queryresult"]
----
+-------------------+
| No data returned. |
+-------------------+
Nodes created: 4
Properties set: 8
Labels added: 4
----

> Typically, there are three steps in `LOAD CSV` queries:

Reviewer 3: Are there cases when this is not true? If not, then drop "typically".

Author: dropped, and updated wording

* Reading CSV data
* Transforming the CSV data
* Creating nodes and relationships from the CSV data

The CSV file format allows for a number of different flavors, for example, using different field delimiters or optional column headers.
CSV files can be read from different sources, and `LOAD CSV` has a mechanism for handling large amounts of data.

> It is entirely possible to import data from multiple CSV files with multiple `LOAD CSV` queries.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is possible to import data from multiple CSV files with multiple `LOAD CSV` queries.
```

Each data set can be transformed as needed in the process, preparing for the creation of nodes and relationships.
Since all CSV data imported via `LOAD CSV` is string data, a common transformation is type casting to specific data types.

[NOTE]
====
`LOAD CSV` is regulated by the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/authentication-authorization/load-privileges/[load privileges].
====

[[load-csv-file-format]]
== CSV file format

> The Wikipedia article on link:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comma-separated_values[Comma-separated values] summarizes why there are different flavors of the CSV format.

Reviewer 3: We try to avoid linking to Wikipedia, if possible.

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV FROM 'file:///artists.csv' AS row
MERGE (:Artist {name: row[1], year: toInteger(row[2])})
----

.Result
[source, role="queryresult"]
----

> +-------------------+

Reviewer: Maybe we should remove the "No data returned" box? Just looks a bit messy and doesnt add anything?

Author: updated all result listings. boxes are gone

Properties set: 8
Labels added: 4
----
====

[NOTE]
It's not possible to use `LOAD CSV` with file URLs in an Aura instance, only remote URLs are supported.

> For other ways of importing data, see link:https://neo4j.com/docs/aura/auradb/importing/importing-data/[Aura -> Importing data].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For other ways of importing data into an Aura instance, see link:https://neo4j.com/docs/aura/auradb/importing/importing-data/[Aura -> Importing data].
```

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/bands/artists.csv' AS row

> MERGE (:Artist {name: row[1], year: toInteger(row[2])})

Reviewer: Here we could add a RETURN clause right? e.g 
MERGE (a:Artist {name: row[1], year: toInteger(row[2])})
RETURN a.name

Author: we should do the same for the previous query (local file) as well then. probably also a couple of others.

...
----

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
CALL {
  LOAD CSV FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/persons.csv' AS row
  MERGE (p:Person)
  SET
  p.tmdbId = row.tmdbId,
  p.name = row.name,
  p.born = row.born
} IN TRANSACTIONS OF 200 ROWS
----

.Result
[source, role="queryresult"]
----
+-------------------+
| No data returned. |
+-------------------+
Nodes created: 868
Properties set: 2604
Labels added: 868
Transactions committed: 5
----
====

[NOTE]
In case of errors, `CALL {...} IN TRANSACTIONS` may only import a part of the CSV data as the transactions are _committed_.
For example, if the first 200 rows are error free, they are committed.
If the next 200 rows contain data that causes an error, the second transaction fails, but leaves the first transaction unaffected.

> === Import data from relational databases

Reviewer: Maybe this section could go after "Import compressed CSV files?"

Author: rephrased

Author: moved

...
----

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/persons.csv' AS row
MERGE (p:Person)
SET
p.tmdbId = toInteger(row.person_tmdbId),
p.name = row.name,
p.born = date(row.born)
----

.Result
[source, role="queryresult"]
----
+-------------------+
| No data returned. |
+-------------------+
Nodes created: 868
Properties set: 2604
Labels added: 868
----
====

For a list of type casting functions, see xref:values-and-types/casting-data.adoc[Casting data values].

=== Handle `null` values

Neo4j does not store `null` values.
`null` or empty fields in a CSV files can be skipped or replaced with default values in `LOAD CSV`.

.Processing a file with `null` values
====
In the file `companies.csv`, some rows do not specify values for some columns.

> The examples show several options of treating `null` values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The examples show several options of how to handle `null` values.
```

.companies.csv
[source, csv, filename=companies.csv]
----
Id,Name,Location,Email,BusinessType
1,Neo4j,San Mateo,contact@neo4j.com,P
2,AAA,,info@aaa.com,
3,BBB,Chicago, ,G
,CCC,Michigan,info@ccc.com,G
----

.Skip `null` values
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM 'file:///companies.csv' AS row
WITH row WHERE row.Id IS NOT NULL

> MERGE (c:Company {id: row.Id});

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MERGE (c:Company {id: row.Id})
```

----

.Provide a default for `null` values
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM 'file:///companies.csv' AS row
WITH row WHERE row.Id IS NOT NULL
MERGE (c:Company {id: row.Id, hqLocation: coalesce(row.Location, "Unknown")})
----

.Change empty strings to `null` values (not stored)
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM 'file:///companies.csv' AS row
WITH row WHERE row.Id IS NOT NULL
MERGE (c:Company {id: row.Id})
SET c.email = nullIf(trim(row.Email), "")
----
====

[TIP]

> Because `null` values are not stored in the database, a strategy for selectively getting rid of some values, for example the empty strings from the last query, is to map them into `null` values.

Reviewer: This sentence is quite difficult to follow?

Author: rephrased

2,Jumanji,65000000.0,USA,113497,6.9,198355,English|French,"When two kids find and play a magical board game, they release a man trapped for decades in it and a host of dangers that can only be stopped by finishing the game.",https://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w440_and_h660_face/vgpXmVaVyUL7GGiDeiK1mKEKzcX.jpg,1995-12-15,262797249.0,104,8844,https://themoviedb.org/movie/8844,1995,Adventure|Children|Fantasy
...
----

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/movies.csv' AS row
MERGE (m:Movie)
SET
m.movieId = toInteger(row.movieId),
m.title = row.title,
m.imdbId = toInteger(row.movie_imdbId),
m.languages = split(row.languages, '|'),
m.genres = split(row.genres, '|')
----

.Result
[source, role="queryresult"]
----
+-------------------+
| No data returned. |
+-------------------+
Nodes created: 93
Properties set: 465
Labels added: 93
----
====

For more string manipulation functions, see xref:functions/string.adoc[String functions].

> == Neo4j CSV functions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== LOAD CSV and Neo4j functions
```

=== Access line numbers with `linenumber()`

> The xref:functions/load-csv.adoc#functions-linenumber[`linenumber()`] function provides the line number which `LOAD CSV` is operating on, or `null` if called out of a `LOAD CSV` context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The xref:functions/load-csv.adoc#functions-linenumber[`linenumber()`] function provides the line number which `LOAD CSV` is operating on, or `null` if called outside of a `LOAD CSV` context.
```

If the source file contains duplicated data and the right constraints are in place, Cypher raises an error.

.Create xref:constraints/examples.adoc#constraints-examples-node-uniqueness[node property uniqueness constraints] on person ID
====

.persons.csv
[source, csv, filename="persons.csv"]
----
person_tmdbId,bio,born,bornIn,died,person_imdbId,name,person_poster,person_url
3,"Legendary Hollywood Icon Harrison Ford was born on July 13, 1942 in Chicago, Illinois.   His family history includes a strong lineage of actors, radio personalities, and models.   Harrison attended public high school in Park Ridge, Illinois where he was a member of the school Radio Station WMTH.  Harrison worked as the lead voice for sports reporting at WMTH for several years.   Acting wasn’t a major interest to Ford until his junior year at Ripon College when he first took an acting class...",1942-07-13,"Chicago, Illinois, USA",,148,Harrison Ford,https://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w440_and_h660_face/5M7oN3sznp99hWYQ9sX0xheswWX.jpg,https://themoviedb.org/person/3
...
----

.Create a node property uniqueness constraint on person ID
[source, cypher]
----

> CREATE CONSTRAINT Person_tmdbId IF NOT EXISTS
> FOR (p:Person)
> REQUIRE p.tmdbId IS UNIQUE

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
CREATE CONSTRAINT Person_tmdbId IF NOT EXISTS
FOR (p:Person) REQUIRE p.tmdbId IS UNIQUE
```

----

.Result
[source, role="queryresult"]
----

> Added 1 constraints

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Added 1 constraint.
```

Added 93 nodes, Set 186 properties, Added 93 labels
Created 372 relationships, Set 372 properties
----
====

[TIP]
For a guide on importing the Northwind dataset from Postgres into Neo4j, see link:https://neo4j.com/docs/getting-started/appendix/tutorials/guide-import-relational-and-etl/[Tutorial: Import data from a relational database into Neo4j].

==== Create additional node labels

In Neo4j a node can have multiple labels, while in a relational setting it's not as straightforward to mix entities.
For example, a node in Neo4j can be labeled both `Dog` and `Actor`, while in a relational model dogs and actors are separate entities.

After a relational dataset has been imported, there may be further labels that can be added, depending on the use case.
Additional labels can speed up pinpointing a node if you use them in your queries.

.Add extra `Actor` label on `Person` nodes
====
The `:ACTED_IN` relationship from _acted_in.csv_ implicitly defines actors as a subset of people.
The following queries adds an additional `Actor` label to all people who have an outgoing `:ACTED_IN` relationship.

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Person)-[:ACTED_IN]->()

> WITH DISTINCT p SET p:Actor

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
WITH DISTINCT p
SET p:Actor
```

The functions `toInteger()` and `date()` allow to cast those values to the appropriate types before importing them.

.persons.csv
[source, csv]
----
person_tmdbId,bio,born,bornIn,died,person_imdbId,name,person_poster,person_url
3,"Legendary Hollywood Icon Harrison Ford was born on July 13, 1942 in Chicago, Illinois.   His family history includes a strong lineage of actors, radio personalities, and models.   Harrison attended public high school in Park Ridge, Illinois where he was a member of the school Radio Station WMTH.  Harrison worked as the lead voice for sports reporting at WMTH for several years.   Acting wasn’t a major interest to Ford until his junior year at Ripon College when he first took an acting class...",1942-07-13,"Chicago, Illinois, USA",,148,Harrison Ford,https://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w440_and_h660_face/5M7oN3sznp99hWYQ9sX0xheswWX.jpg,https://themoviedb.org/person/3
...
----

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/persons.csv' AS row
MERGE (p:Person {tmdbId: toInteger(row.person_tmdbId)})
SET p.name = row.name, p.born = date(row.born)

> RETURN p LIMIT 5

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
RETURN p
LIMIT 5
```

| (:Person {name: "Tom Hanks", tmdbId: 31, born: 1956-07-09})    |
| (:Person {name: "Robin Wright", tmdbId: 32, born: 1966-04-08}) |
| (:Person {name: "Sally Field", tmdbId: 35, born: 1946-11-06})  |
| (:Person {name: "Sean Bean", tmdbId: 48, born: 1959-04-17})    |
+----------------------------------------------------------------+
Added 444 nodes, Set 1332 properties, Added 444 labels

----
====

For a list of type casting functions, see xref:values-and-types/casting-data.adoc[Casting data values].

=== Handle `null` values

Neo4j does not store `null` values.
`null` or empty fields in a CSV files can be skipped or replaced with default values in `LOAD CSV`.

.Processing a file with `null` values
====
In the file `companies.csv`, some rows do not specify values for some columns.
The examples show several options of how to handle `null` values.

.companies.csv
[source, csv, filename=companies.csv]
----
Id,Name,Location,Email,BusinessType
1,Neo4j,San Mateo,contact@neo4j.com,P
2,AAA,,info@aaa.com,
3,BBB,Chicago, ,G
,CCC,Michigan,info@ccc.com,G
----

.Skip `null` values
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM 'file:///companies.csv' AS row

> WITH row WHERE row.Id IS NOT NULL

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
WITH row
WHERE row.Id IS NOT NULL
```

MERGE (c:Company {id: row.Id})
----

.Provide a default for `null` values
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM 'file:///companies.csv' AS row

> WITH row WHERE row.Id IS NOT NULL

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
WITH row
WHERE row.Id IS NOT NULL
```

MERGE (c:Company {id: row.Id, hqLocation: coalesce(row.Location, "Unknown")})
----

.Change empty `STRING` values to `null` values (not stored)
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM 'file:///companies.csv' AS row

> WITH row WHERE row.Id IS NOT NULL

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
WITH row
WHERE row.Id IS NOT NULL
```

The columns `languages` and `genres` contain list-like values.
Both are separated by a pipe `|`, and `split()` allows to make them into Cypher lists ahead of inserting them into the database.

.movies.csv
[source, csv]
----
movieId,title,budget,countries,movie_imdbId,imdbRating,imdbVotes,languages,plot,movie_poster,released,revenue,runtime,movie_tmdbId,movie_url,year,genres
1,Toy Story,30000000.0,USA,114709,8.3,591836,English,A cowboy doll is profoundly threatened and jealous when a new spaceman figure supplants him as top toy in a boy's room.,https://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w440_and_h660_face/uXDfjJbdP4ijW5hWSBrPrlKpxab.jpg,1995-11-22,373554033.0,81,862,https://themoviedb.org/movie/862,1995,Adventure|Animation|Children|Comedy|Fantasy
2,Jumanji,65000000.0,USA,113497,6.9,198355,English|French,"When two kids find and play a magical board game, they release a man trapped for decades in it and a host of dangers that can only be stopped by finishing the game.",https://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w440_and_h660_face/vgpXmVaVyUL7GGiDeiK1mKEKzcX.jpg,1995-12-15,262797249.0,104,8844,https://themoviedb.org/movie/8844,1995,Adventure|Children|Fantasy
...
----

.Query
[source, cypher]
----

> LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/movies.csv' AS row
> MERGE (m:Movie {id: toInteger(row.movieId)})
> SET m.title = row.title, m.imdbId = toInteger(row.movie_imdbId),
>     m.languages = split(row.languages, '|'), m.genres = split(row.genres, '|')
> RETURN m LIMIT 5

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/movies.csv' AS row
MERGE (m:Movie {id: toInteger(row.movieId)})
SET 
    m.title = row.title,
    m.imdbId = toInteger(row.movie_imdbId),
    m.languages = split(row.languages, '|'), 
    m.genres = split(row.genres, '|')
RETURN m 
LIMIT 5
```

[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV FROM 'file:///artists.zip' AS row
MERGE (:Artist {name: row[1], year: toInteger(row[2])})
----

=== Import data from relational databases

If the source data comes from a relational model, it's worth evaluating how to gain the most from moving to a graph data model.
Before running the import, think about how the data can be modeled as a graph, and adapt its structure accordingly when running the import (see link:https://neo4j.com/docs/getting-started/data-modeling/guide-data-modeling/[Graph data modeling]).

Data from relational databases may consist of one or multiple CSV files, depending on the source database structure.
A performant approach is to run multiple passes of `LOAD CSV` to import nodes separately from relationships.

.Import from a single CSV file
====
The source file link:https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/books.csv[_books.csv_] contains information about both authors and books.
From a graph perspective, these are nodes with different labels, so it takes different queries to load them.

The example executes multiple passes of `LOAD CSV` on that one file, and each pass focuses on the creation of _one_ entity type.

> This is the most performant practice, see <<_separate_creation_of_nodes_and_relationships>>.

Reviewer 4: Looks the <<>> part isn't rendering correctly

Author: good catch :) it refers to a section we commented out. gonna update

Labels added: 4
----

[[load-csv-field-delimiter]]
=== Field delimiter

The default field delimiter is `,`.

> A CSV file may have other field delimiters:

Reviewer 2: As for other examples: it's tiring to read one sentence, one code block, one sentence, one code block. It makes the reader's experience easier to describe all at once _before_ an example, and _then_ show the example. It doesn't break your thought in many small bits.

> A CSV file may have other field delimiters:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
This sentence doesn't add anything. It _is_ a fact of life that a csv may have other delimiter, but here what matters is that `,` is the default, but that can be altered with `FIELDTERMINATOR` to adjust to the csv you have at hand. 

For example:

> The default field delimiter is `,`. Use the `FIELDTERMINATOR` option to specify a different delimiter.

Everything else is superfluous, we can let the examples speak :)

.artists-fieldterminator.csv

> [source, csv, role="noheaders", filename="artists-fieldterminator.csv"]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[source, csv, filename="artists-fieldterminator.csv"]
```
`noheader` doesn't do anything to code blocks anymore and can/should be removed from all blocks.

Labels added: 4
----

[[load-csv-field-delimiter]]
=== Field delimiter

The default field delimiter is `,`.
A CSV file may have other field delimiters:

.artists-fieldterminator.csv
[source, csv, role="noheaders", filename="artists-fieldterminator.csv"]
----
1;ABBA;1992
2;Roxette;1986
3;Europe;1979
4;The Cardigans;1992
----

> In that case, change the field delimiter character by using the optional `FIELDTERMINATOR` in your query:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this case, specify the field delimiter character by using the optional `FIELDTERMINATOR` in your query:
```

Reviewer 3: Also, maybe you should mention what happens if you use a different delimiter without specifying it?

====

.persons.csv
[source, csv, filename="persons.csv"]
----
person_tmdbId,bio,born,bornIn,died,person_imdbId,name,person_poster,person_url
3,"Legendary Hollywood Icon Harrison Ford was born on July 13, 1942 in Chicago, Illinois.   His family history includes a strong lineage of actors, radio personalities, and models.   Harrison attended public high school in Park Ridge, Illinois where he was a member of the school Radio Station WMTH.  Harrison worked as the lead voice for sports reporting at WMTH for several years.   Acting wasn’t a major interest to Ford until his junior year at Ripon College when he first took an acting class...",1942-07-13,"Chicago, Illinois, USA",,148,Harrison Ford,https://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w440_and_h660_face/5M7oN3sznp99hWYQ9sX0xheswWX.jpg,https://themoviedb.org/person/3
...
----

.Create a node property uniqueness constraint on person ID
[source, cypher]
----
CREATE CONSTRAINT Person_tmdbId IF NOT EXISTS
FOR (p:Person)
REQUIRE p.tmdbId IS UNIQUE
----

.Result
[source, role="queryresult"]
----
+-------------------+
| No data returned. |
+-------------------+
Added 1 constraint.
----
====

=== Handle large amounts of data

> `LOAD CSV` may timeout for files containing a significant number of rows (approaching hundreds of thousands or millions). For large files, it's recommended to split the import process in several lighter transactions through the clause xref:subqueries/subqueries-in-transactions.adoc[`CALL {...} IN TRANSACTIONS`].

Reviewer 4: I am not sure if timeout is accurate here. CIT will not be faster, so I would assume it is a memory issue, not a time issue. Holding a significant amount of un-committed nodes in memory will cause an OOM exception, so periodically committing with CIT is recommended. However, it is good to note CIT is not ACID compliant to what a user may expect as the transactions are *committed*. E.g if the first 200 rows are error free, they are committed, the next 200 might contain something that has an error, and in this case that entire tx will fail, this failure does not roll back the previous CIT afaik :)

Author: rephrased + added note

3,"Legendary Hollywood Icon Harrison Ford was born on July 13, 1942 in Chicago, Illinois.   His family history includes a strong lineage of actors, radio personalities, and models.   Harrison attended public high school in Park Ridge, Illinois where he was a member of the school Radio Station WMTH.  Harrison worked as the lead voice for sports reporting at WMTH for several years.   Acting wasn’t a major interest to Ford until his junior year at Ripon College when he first took an acting class...",1942-07-13,"Chicago, Illinois, USA",,148,Harrison Ford,https://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w440_and_h660_face/5M7oN3sznp99hWYQ9sX0xheswWX.jpg,https://themoviedb.org/person/3
...
----

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
CALL {
  LOAD CSV FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/persons.csv' AS row
  MERGE (p:Person)
  SET
  p.tmdbId = row.tmdbId,
  p.name = row.name,
  p.born = row.born
} IN TRANSACTIONS OF 200 ROWS
----

.Result
[source, role="queryresult"]
----
+-------------------+
| No data returned. |
+-------------------+
Nodes created: 868
Properties set: 2604
Labels added: 868
Transactions committed: 5
----
====

=== Import data from relational databases

> If the source data comes from a relational model, it's worth evaluating whether there's anything to gain in the move to a graph data model.

Reviewer 4: Are we sure we want to say this? 😅 This sounds to me like "Are you really really sure you want to use Neo4j?"

Author: rephrased

Before running the import, think about how the data can be modeled as a graph, and adapt its structure accordingly when running the import (see link:https://neo4j.com/docs/getting-started/data-modeling/guide-data-modeling/[Graph data modeling]).

Data from relational databases may consist of one or multiple CSV files, depending on the source database structure.

> In either case, the most performant approach is to run multiple passes of `LOAD CSV` to import nodes separately from relationships.

Reviewer 4: I am not sure if "the most performant approach" is true in all cases.

Author: slightly rephrased

After a relational dataset has been imported, there may be further labels that can be added, depending on the use case.
Additional labels can speed up pinpointing a node if you use them in your queries.

.Add extra `Actor` label on `Person` nodes
====
The `:ACTED_IN` relationship from _acted_in.csv_ implicitly defines actors as a subset of people.
The following queries adds an additional `Actor` label to all people who have an outgoing `:ACTED_IN` relationship.

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Person)-[:ACTED_IN]->()
WITH DISTINCT p SET p:Actor
----

.Result
[source, role="queryresult"]
----
+-------------------+
| No data returned. |
+-------------------+
Labels added: 104
----
====

== Pre-process the data during import

=== Cast CSV columns to Neo4j data types

`LOAD CSV` inserts all imported CSV data as string properties.
However, Neo4j supports a range of xref:values-and-types/index.adoc[data types], and storing data with appropriate types allows both to query it more effectively and to process it with type-specific Cypher functions.

.Import numeric and temporal data
====

> The column `person_tmdbId` and `born` in the file link:https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/persons.csv[_persons.csv_] contains integers and dates respectively.

Reviewer 4: We have been using the Cypher Value way of writing these elsewhere e.g INTEGER values and DATE values

Author: fixed

The functions `toInteger()` and `date()` allow to cast those values to the appropriate types before importing them.

.persons.csv
[source, csv]
----
person_tmdbId,bio,born,bornIn,died,person_imdbId,name,person_poster,person_url
3,"Legendary Hollywood Icon Harrison Ford was born on July 13, 1942 in Chicago, Illinois.   His family history includes a strong lineage of actors, radio personalities, and models.   Harrison attended public high school in Park Ridge, Illinois where he was a member of the school Radio Station WMTH.  Harrison worked as the lead voice for sports reporting at WMTH for several years.   Acting wasn’t a major interest to Ford until his junior year at Ripon College when he first took an acting class...",1942-07-13,"Chicago, Illinois, USA",,148,Harrison Ford,https://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w440_and_h660_face/5M7oN3sznp99hWYQ9sX0xheswWX.jpg,https://themoviedb.org/person/3
...
----

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/persons.csv' AS row
MERGE (p:Person)
SET

> p.tmdbId = toInteger(row.tmdbId),

Reviewer 4: Is this the correct styling?

Author: styling?

noticed however that the column is "person_tmbdId"

Author: tried my best to style the queries better

p.name = row.name,
p.born = date(row.born)
----

.Result
[source, role="queryresult"]
----
+-------------------+
| No data returned. |
+-------------------+
Nodes created: 868
Properties set: 2604
Labels added: 868
----
====

For a list of type casting functions, see xref:values-and-types/casting-data.adoc[Casting data values].

=== Handle null values

Neo4j does not store null values.

> Null or empty fields in a CSV files can be skipped or replaced with default values in `LOAD CSV`.

Reviewer 4: In other files we backtick null

Author: right! added

.Processing a file with null values
====
In the file `companies.csv`, some rows do not specify values for some columns.
The examples show several options of treating null values.

.companies.csv
[source, csv, filename=companies.csv]
----
Id,Name,Location,Email,BusinessType
1,Neo4j,San Mateo,contact@neo4j.com,P
2,AAA,,info@aaa.com,
3,BBB,Chicago,,G
----

.Skip null values
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM 'file:///companies.csv' AS row

> WITH row WHERE row.Id IS NOT NULL

Reviewer 4: Id is never null in the example

Author: true, we should probably add another line with a null Id

Author: added such a line (and had to adapt examples 2 and 3 as well to be able to handle it :) )

MERGE (c:Company {companyId: row.Id});
----

.Provide a default for null values
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM 'file:///companies.csv' AS row
MERGE (c:Company {companyId: row.Id, hqLocation: coalesce(row.Location, "Unknown")})
----

.Change empty strings to null values (not stored)
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM 'file:///companies.csv' AS row
MERGE (c:Company {companyId: row.Id})

> SET c.emailAddress = CASE trim(row.Email) WHEN "" THEN null ELSE row.Email END

Reviewer 4: This query is not doing anything extra. It looks like it works because trim(null) = null and the ELSE row.Email returns null. But all cases flow through to else, maybe change to make it more useful?

Also; the shorter way of writing this query is (nullIf is also just a shorthand for a variant of CASE):

LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM 'file:///companies.csv' AS row
MERGE (c:Company {companyId: row.Id})
SET c.emailAddress = nullIf(row.Email, "")

Author: what if we change the example line 3 to:
`3,BBB,Chicago, ,G` (include a space character, to make it not null)?
would the query then make sense?

Author: added the space character and verified that it creates a string property

----
====

[TIP]

> Because null values are not stored in the database, a strategy for selectively getting rid of some values is to map them into null values.

Reviewer 4: This seems like a strange bit of advice?

Author: i think in a way it refers to the example above the tip ("Change empty strings to `null` values) where row.Email is tested with CASE and if it's the empty string, then it's assigned `null`, selectively getting rid of those empty strings.

Maybe it's a bit cryptic on its own. Added a reference to the query

edit: ok, this is related to the comment in line 444.

Author: should make sense now with the additions and the reference

=== Split list values

The function `split()` allows to convert a string of elements into a list.

.Parse movies languages and genres as lists
====
The file link:https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/movies.csv[_movies.csv_] contains a header line and a total of 94 lines.

The columns `languages` and `genres` contain list-like values.

> Both lists are separated by a pipe `|`, and `split()` allows to make them into Cypher lists ahead of inserting them into the database.

Reviewer 4: but you are inserting them into the database, just not as a single string?

Author: changed "Both lists" to "Both", because the point is that they're still a string before splitting

.movies.csv
[source, csv]
----
movieId,title,budget,countries,movie_imdbId,imdbRating,imdbVotes,languages,plot,movie_poster,released,revenue,runtime,movie_tmdbId,movie_url,year,genres
1,Toy Story,30000000.0,USA,114709,8.3,591836,English,A cowboy doll is profoundly threatened and jealous when a new spaceman figure supplants him as top toy in a boy's room.,https://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w440_and_h660_face/uXDfjJbdP4ijW5hWSBrPrlKpxab.jpg,1995-11-22,373554033.0,81,862,https://themoviedb.org/movie/862,1995,Adventure|Animation|Children|Comedy|Fantasy
2,Jumanji,65000000.0,USA,113497,6.9,198355,English|French,"When two kids find and play a magical board game, they release a man trapped for decades in it and a host of dangers that can only be stopped by finishing the game.",https://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w440_and_h660_face/vgpXmVaVyUL7GGiDeiK1mKEKzcX.jpg,1995-12-15,262797249.0,104,8844,https://themoviedb.org/movie/8844,1995,Adventure|Children|Fantasy
...
----

.Query
[source, cypher]
----

> LOAD CSV FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/movies.csv' AS row

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/movies.csv' AS row
```

AS row
MERGE (b:Book {id: row.id title: row.title})
MERGE (a:Author {name: row.author});

// Create `WROTE` relationships
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS
FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/books.csv'
AS row
MATCH (a:Author{name: row.author})
MATCH (b:Book{id: row.id})
MERGE (a)-[:WROTE]->(b);
----

.Result
[source, role="queryresult"]
----
+-------------------+
| No data returned. |
+-------------------+
Nodes created: 868
Properties set: 2604
Labels added: 868
----

====

.Import from multiple CSV files
====
The file link:https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/acted_in.csv[_acted_in.csv_] contains data about the relationship between actors and the movies they acted in (from link:https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/persons.csv[_persons.csv_] and link:https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/movies.csv[_movies.csv_]).
Actors and movies are linked through their ID columns `person_tmdbId` and `movieId`.

The file also contains the role the actor played in the movie, and it is imported in Neo4j as a relationship property.

.acted_in.csv
[source, csv, filename="acted_in.csv"]
----
movieId,person_tmdbId,role
1,12899,Slinky Dog (voice)
1,12898,Buzz Lightyear (voice)
...
----

> It takes three `LOAD CSV` passes to import this dataset: the first two  create `Person` nodes from _persons.csv_ and `Movie` nodes from _movies.csv_, and the third adds the `:ACTED_IN` relationship from _acted_in.csv_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It takes three `LOAD CSV` clauses to import this dataset: the first two create `Person` nodes from _persons.csv_ and `Movie` nodes from _movies.csv_, and the third adds the `:ACTED_IN` relationship from _acted_in.csv_.
```

Author: there are more occurrences of "passes" in the file - is it something we should avoid in general?

Author: added

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
// Create person nodes
LOAD CSV FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/persons.csv' AS row
MERGE (p:Person {tmdbId: row.person_tmdbId, name: row.name});

// Create movie nodes
LOAD CSV FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/movies.csv' AS row
MERGE (m:Movie {movieId: row.movieId, title: row.title});

// Create relationships
LOAD CSV FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/acted_in.csv' AS row
MATCH (p:Person {tmdbId: row.person_tmdbId})
MATCH (m:Movie {movieId: row.movieId})
MERGE (p)-[r:ACTED_IN {role: row.role}]->(m);
----

.Result
[source, role="queryresult"]
----
+-------------------+
| No data returned. |
+-------------------+
Nodes created: 961
Relationships created: 372
Properties set: 2294
----
====

[TIP]

> For a guide on importing the Northwind dataset from Postgres into Neo4j, see link:https://neo4j.com/docs/getting-started/appendix/tutorials/guide-import-relational-and-etl/[Tutorial: Import data from a relational database into Neo4j].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a guide on importing the Northwind dataset from Postgres into Neo4j, see link:https://neo4j.com/docs/getting-started/appendix/tutorials/guide-import-relational-and-etl/[Getting Started Guide: Import data from a relational database into Neo4j].
```

Author: the page has "Tutorial: ..." as its title.
maybe something like ..."see link:https://neo4j.com/docs/getting-started/appendix/tutorials/guide-import-relational-and-etl/[Tutorial: Import data from a relational database into Neo4j] in the _Getting Started Guide_." ?

Author: added "in the Getting Started Guide"

==== Create additional node labels

In Neo4j a node can have multiple labels, while in a relational setting it's not as straightforward to mix entities.
For example, a node in Neo4j can be labeled both `Dog` and `Actor`, while in a relational model dogs and actors are separate entities.

After a relational dataset has been imported, there may be further labels that can be added, depending on the use case.
Additional labels can speed up pinpointing a node if you use them in your queries.

.Add extra `Actor` label on `Person` nodes
====
The `:ACTED_IN` relationship from _acted_in.csv_ implicitly defines actors as a subset of people.
The following queries adds an additional `Actor` label to all people who have an outgoing `:ACTED_IN` relationship.

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Person)-[:ACTED_IN]->()
WITH DISTINCT p SET p:Actor
----

.Result
[source, role="queryresult"]
----
+-------------------+
| No data returned. |
+-------------------+
Labels added: 104
----
====

== Pre-process the data during import

=== Cast CSV columns to Neo4j data types

> `LOAD CSV` inserts all imported CSV data as string properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`LOAD CSV` inserts all imported CSV data as `STRING` properties.
```

Labels added: 4
----

[NOTE]
====
You can use the hexadecimal representation of the unicode character for the field delimiter if you prepend `{backslash}u`.
Write the encoding with four digits, for example, `{backslash}u003B` is equivalent to `;` (semicolon).

> ====

Reviewer 2: I'm torn about this. I can't phantom why on earth somebody would want to use the hex representation of a unicode char as delimiter rather than ... the char itself. If there's no use for it, there's no need to mention it. Maybe @gem-neo4j has an idea?

Quoted strings are allowed in the CSV file and the quotes are dropped when reading the data with `LOAD CSV`.
To apply quotation to a string, wrap it with double quote characters: `"my_string"`.

The example below has both additional quotes around each value as well as escaped quotes in the second value:

.artists-with-escaped-char.csv
[source, csv, role="noheaders", filename="artists-with-escaped-char.csv"]
----
"1","The ""Symbol""","1992"
----

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV FROM 'file:///artists-with-escaped-char.csv' AS row
MERGE (a:Artist {name: row[1], year: toInteger(row[2])})
RETURN
  a.name AS name,
  a.year AS year,
  size(a.name) AS size
----

Note that `name` is a string and that it is wrapped in single quotes in the output.
The third column outputs the string length as `size`.
The length only counts what is between the single quotes, but not the quotes themselves:

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="3*<m"]
|===
| name | year | size
| 'The "Symbol"' | 1992 | 12
3+d| Nodes created: 1 +
Properties set: 2 +
Labels added: 1
|===

[[load-csv-access-line-numbers-with-linenumber]]

> === Access line numbers with `linenumber()`

Reviewer 2: This and the next section don't belong in this section, they don't have to to with the CSV file format. They are neo4j functions available on load csv contexts.

Author: i hope i found a section for them

For certain scenarios, like debugging a problem with a CSV file, it may be useful to get the current line number which `LOAD CSV` is operating on.

> The `linenumber()` function provides exactly that or `null` if called without a `LOAD CSV` context.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `linenumber()` function provides the line number which `LOAD CSV` is currently operating on, or `null` if called without a `LOAD CSV` context.
```
The previous sentence is superfluous: the reason is not only conciseness, but also that it's uninformative. There's at least two reasons I can think of where I would use `linenumber()`: debugging, or to fake a row ID (i.e. I could assign an ID to each based on the row line number). There may be more, but unless we actually _detail_ them, the sentence is only a leading filler the reader has to go through before reaching the actual content.

Labels added: 4
----

[NOTE]
====
You can use the hexadecimal representation of the unicode character for the field delimiter if you prepend `{backslash}u`.
Write the encoding with four digits, for example, `{backslash}u003B` is equivalent to `;` (semicolon).
====

[[load-csv-character-escaping-and-quotes]]
=== Character escaping and quotes

> If the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/configuration/configuration-settings[configuration setting] `dbms.import.csv.legacy_quote_escaping` is set to `true` (the default value), `\` is used as the escape character: `"The {backslash}"Symbol{backslash}""`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the configuration setting link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/configuration/configuration-settings[`dbms.import.csv.legacy_quote_escaping`]  is set to `true` (the default value), `\` is used as the escape character: `"The {backslash}"Symbol{backslash}""`.
```

Author: hm... the link does not target the actual setting, but the general configuration settings section instead.
I think it's better to remove the link as this might be confusing

The inner double quote characters are escaped, leaving them unprocessed by `LOAD CSV`.
For the double quote character, you can achieve the same thing by repeating it - the escape sequence above is equivalent to `"The ""Symbol"""`.

Quoted strings are allowed in the CSV file and the quotes are dropped when reading the data with `LOAD CSV`.
To apply quotation to a string, wrap it with double quote characters: `"my_string"`.

The example below has both additional quotes around each value as well as escaped quotes in the second value:

.artists-with-escaped-char.csv
[source, csv, role="noheaders", filename="artists-with-escaped-char.csv"]
----
"1","The ""Symbol""","1992"
----

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV FROM 'file:///artists-with-escaped-char.csv' AS row
MERGE (a:Artist {name: row[1], year: toInteger(row[2])})
RETURN
  a.name AS name,
  a.year AS year,
  size(a.name) AS size
----

> Note that `name` is a string and that it is wrapped in single quotes in the output below.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that `name` is a string and that it is wrapped in single quotes in the output.
```

Reviewer 3: We try to avoid directions for accessibility purposes.

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV FROM 'file:///artists.csv' AS row
RETURN linenumber() AS number, row
----

.Result
[role="queryresult"]
----
+---------------------------------------+
| number | row                          |
+---------------------------------------+
| 1      | ["1","ABBA","1992"]          |
| 2      | ["2","Roxette","1986"]       |
| 3      | ["3","Europe","1979"]        |
| 4      | ["4","The Cardigans","1992"] |
+---------------------------------------+
4 rows
----

> Also see link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/{page-version}/functions/load-csv/#functions-linenumber[linenumber()] under LOAD CSV functions.

Reviewer 2: Link to this page when you first bring up `linenumber()` and remove this sentence. It also risks being overseen if buried down here.
Also, always use `xref` for links to the same manual (they get flagged as errors if they are broken, while links don't).

[[load-csv-access-the-csv-file-path-with-file]]
=== Access the CSV file path with `file()`

For certain scenarios, it may be useful to get the absolute path of the file that `LOAD CSV` is operating on.

> The `file()` function provides exactly if it is called in a `LOAD CSV` context (`null` otherwise).

Reviewer 2: As above, make the first sentence the object of the second.

.artists.csv
[source, csv, role="noheaders", filename="artists.csv"]
----
1,ABBA,1992
2,Roxette,1986
3,Europe,1979
4,The Cardigans,1992
----

.Query
[source, cypher, role=test-result-skip]
----
LOAD CSV FROM 'file:///artists.csv' AS row
RETURN DISTINCT file() AS path
----

> Since `LOAD CSV` can temporary download a file to process it, it is important to note that `file()` always returns the path on disk.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[TIP]
`file()` always returns a local path, even when loading remote CSV files. For remote resources, `file()` returns the temporary local path it was downloaded to.
```
It is an important remark to draw attention to, hence the admonition.

Move this to the bottom of the section so that query and result are one after the other.

> If `LOAD CSV` is invoked with a `file:///` URL that points to your disk, `file()` returns that same path.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
It would be odd if it didn't ;)

.Result
[role="queryresult"]
----
+------------------------------------------+
| path                                     |
+------------------------------------------+
| "/home/example/neo4j/import/artists.csv" |
+------------------------------------------+
1 row
----

> Also see link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/{page-version}/functions/load-csv/#functions-file[file()] under LOAD CSV functions.

Reviewer 2: As before, link to `file()` when you first bring it up and remove this.

[[load-csv-get-csv-data-into-neo4j]]

> == Get CSV data into Neo4j

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Import CSV data into Neo4j
```
I find it a better choice of words.
However, I'm hesitant whether this top section is needed at all. It's a mix of subsections on somewhat related, but not entirely linked topics. Config settings only apply to local files. Others are more like tips for specific needs. I think I'd drop this section, and let the subsections live on their own. Typecasting, splitting, and additional labels can make up a "Data processing" section though.

> The following sections summarize where CSV files may be located for the import via `LOAD CSV`, how `LOAD CSV` can handle large amounts of data, how to type cast CSV string data in Neo4j and other data transformations and how to create nodes and relationships from the data.

Reviewer 2: As I've said somewhere else, the ToC does a great job at providing a high-level view of the content within a section. There's no need to verbalize it.

[[load-csv-file-location]]

> === CSV file location

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Configuration settings for file URLs
```
and then drop the same title later on

> You can store CSV files on the database server and then access them by using a `+file:///+` URL, depending on the configuration settings:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can store CSV files on the server and then access them by using a `file:///` URL, depending on the configuration settings:
```
I don't think we need the `+`, but I might be wrong. If so, apply all throughout.

Author: tried it without, which makes the text a clickable link (it's no longer a literal monospace string). it's needed if there's a colon `:` after `file` i guess (and that's the case for all occurrences)

.Configuration settings for file URLs
link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/configuration/configuration-settings#config_dbms.security.allow_csv_import_from_file_urls[dbms.security.allow_csv_import_from_file_urls]::
This setting determines if Cypher allows the use of `+file:///+` URLs when loading data using `LOAD CSV`.
Such URLs identify files on the filesystem of the database server.
Default is _true_.

> Setting `dbms.security.allow_csv_import_from_file_urls=false`  completely disables access to the file system for `LOAD CSV`.

Reviewer 2: Keep the first sentence only -- people can follow the link and read for more info, we don't need to duplicate it (it's only one more source that can get out of date).

link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/configuration/configuration-settings#config_server.directories.import[server.directories.import]::

> This setting sets the root directory for `+file:///+` URLs used with the Cypher `LOAD CSV` clause.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This setting sets the root directory relative to which `file:///` URLs are parsed.
```
And drop everything else.

This should be set to a single directory relative to the Neo4j installation path on the database server.
All requests to load from `+file:///+` URLs are then relative to the specified directory.
The default value set in the config settings is _import_.
This is a security measure which prevents the database from accessing files outside the standard link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/configuration/file-locations[import directory],
similar to how a Unix `chroot` operates.
Setting this to an empty field allows access to all files within the Neo4j installation folder.
Commenting out this setting disables the security feature, allowing all files in the local system to be imported.
This is **not** recommended.

File URLs are resolved relative to the `server.directories.import` directory.

> For example, a file URL typically looks like `+file:///myfile.csv+` or `+file:///myproject/myfile.csv+`.

Reviewer 2: Both sentences are superfluous -- both from the option description before, and the number of examples we've shown, both pieces of information are clear already.

> When using `+file:///+` URLs, spaces and other non-alphanumeric characters must be {url_encoded_link}.

Reviewer 2: Put this link inline: there's only one instance of it, so there's no point in having it in a var.

If `server.directories.import` is set to the default value _import_, using the above URLs in `LOAD CSV` would read from _<NEO4J_HOME>/import/myfile.csv_ and _<NEO4J_HOME>/import/myproject/myfile.csv_ respectively.

> *  If it is set to _/data/csv_, using the above URLs in `LOAD CSV` would read from _<NEO4J_HOME>/data/csv/myfile.csv_ and _<NEO4J_HOME>/data/csv/myproject/myfile.csv_ respectively.

Reviewer 2: - I don't understand where `myproject` is coming from.
- Unless `myproject` plays some special role (i.e. it defaults to reading from _two_ locations), this example is very trivial and saying that something "is the root directory relative to which paths are resolved" sounds descriptive enough for me.

Author: re-read the getting started LOAD CSV article, and i agree, it looks like "myproject" is a variable for subdirectories to express the same thing - that paths relative to the import directory are allowed. removing the lines.

> Alternatively, you can import data from a CSV file in a remote location into Neo4j:

Reviewer 2: This is very _very_ important and I'm surprised to learn about this so late in the page. A remark+example about this should be high up at the introduction level.

Also make it into its own section.

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV FROM 'file:///artists.csv' AS row
RETURN linenumber() AS number, row
----

.Result
[role="queryresult"]
----
+---------------------------------------+
| number | row                          |
+---------------------------------------+
| 1      | ["1","ABBA","1992"]          |
| 2      | ["2","Roxette","1986"]       |
| 3      | ["3","Europe","1979"]        |
| 4      | ["4","The Cardigans","1992"] |
+---------------------------------------+
4 rows
----

Also see link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/{page-version}/functions/load-csv/#functions-linenumber[linenumber()] under LOAD CSV functions.

[[load-csv-access-the-csv-file-path-with-file]]
=== Access the CSV file path with `file()`

> For certain scenarios, it may be useful to get the absolute path of the file that `LOAD CSV` is operating on.

Reviewer 3: Such as? It may be useful to add a scenario here.

Author: for some reason, i removed the sentence that is used in the section above ("like debugging a problem with a CSV file"). I'll add it again

> The `file()` function provides exactly if it is called in a `LOAD CSV` context (`null` otherwise).

Reviewer 3: Provides exactly what?

Author: copy-paste error, a "that" is missing. i'll add it

.artists.csv
[source, csv, role="noheaders", filename="artists.csv"]
----
1,ABBA,1992
2,Roxette,1986
3,Europe,1979
4,The Cardigans,1992
----

.Query
[source, cypher, role=test-result-skip]
----
LOAD CSV FROM 'file:///artists.csv' AS row
RETURN DISTINCT file() AS path
----

> Since `LOAD CSV` can temporary download a file to process it, it is important to note that `file()` will always return the path on disk.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since `LOAD CSV` can temporary download a file to process it, it is important to note that `file()` always returns the path on disk.
```

> If `LOAD CSV` is invoked with a `file:///` URL that points to your disk `file()` will return that same path.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If `LOAD CSV` is invoked with a `file:///` URL that points to your disk, `file()` returns that same path.
```

.Result
[role="queryresult"]
----
+------------------------------------------+
| path                                     |
+------------------------------------------+
| "/home/example/neo4j/import/artists.csv" |
+------------------------------------------+
1 row
----

Also see link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/{page-version}/functions/load-csv/#functions-file[file()] under LOAD CSV functions.

[[load-csv-get-csv-data-into-neo4j]]
== Get CSV data into Neo4j

> The following sections summarize where CSV files may be located for the import via `LOAD CSV`, how `LOAD CSV` can handle large amounts of data, how to type cast CSV string data in Neo4j and other data transformations and how to create nodes and relationships from the data.

Reviewer 3: This section is a bit awkward.

Author: yes, it's filler. i'll remove it

[[load-csv-file-location]]
=== CSV file location

You can store CSV files on the database server and then access them by using a `+file:///+` URL, depending on the configuration settings:

.Configuration settings for file URLs
link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/configuration/configuration-settings#config_dbms.security.allow_csv_import_from_file_urls[dbms.security.allow_csv_import_from_file_urls]::
This setting determines if Cypher allows the use of `+file:///+` URLs when loading data using `LOAD CSV`.
Such URLs identify files on the filesystem of the database server.
Default is _true_.

> Setting `dbms.security.allow_csv_import_from_file_urls=false` will completely disable access to the file system for `LOAD CSV`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Setting `dbms.security.allow_csv_import_from_file_urls=false`  completely disables access to the file system for `LOAD CSV`.
```

link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/configuration/configuration-settings#config_server.directories.import[server.directories.import]::

> Sets the root directory for `+file:///+` URLs used with the Cypher `LOAD CSV` clause.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This setting sets the root directory for `+file:///+` URLs used with the Cypher `LOAD CSV` clause.
```
To follow the same structure as above.

This should be set to a single directory relative to the Neo4j installation path on the database server.
All requests to load from `+file:///+` URLs are then relative to the specified directory.
The default value set in the config settings is _import_.
This is a security measure which prevents the database from accessing files outside the standard link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/configuration/file-locations[import directory],
similar to how a Unix `chroot` operates.
Setting this to an empty field allows access to all files within the Neo4j installation folder.
Commenting out this setting disables the security feature, allowing all files in the local system to be imported.

> This is definitely not recommended.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is **not** recommended.
```

File URLs are resolved relative to the `server.directories.import` directory.

> For example, a file URL typically looks like `+file:///myfile.csv+` or `+file:///myproject/myfile.csv+`.

Reviewer 3: Typically? Are there a lot of exceptions?

Author: removed "typically"

Labels added: 4
----

`LOAD CSV` supports accessing CSV files via _HTTPS_, _HTTP_, and _FTP_.

> `LOAD CSV` will follow _HTTP_ redirects but for security reasons it won't follow redirects which change the protocol, for example, if the redirect is going from _HTTPS_ to _HTTP_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`LOAD CSV` will follow _HTTP_ redirects but for security reasons it won't follow redirects which change the protocol.
```

[NOTE]
====
The file location is relative to the import.
The config setting `server.directories.import` only applies to a local disc but doesn't to remote URLs.

> ====

Reviewer 2: I think we have stressed this information enough, we don't need an extra admonition.

`LOAD CSV` supports resources compressed with _gzip_ and _Deflate_.

> Additionally `LOAD CSV` supports locally stored CSV files compressed with _ZIP_.

Reviewer 2: This is something I didn't know and which is worth expanding on. Can I do `load csv archive.zip`? What does it happen with the files inside? How does neo4j pick one? Can we have an example?

Author: added

[[load-csv-large-amounts-of-data]]
=== Large amounts of data

If the CSV file contains a significant number of rows approaching hundreds of thousands or millions, it is recommended that you serialize the data processing and reduce memory overhead by doing so.
You can achieve this via link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/{page-version}/subqueries/subqueries-in-transactions/[multiple transactions of subqueries].
The syntax for this is `+CALL { ... } IN TRANSACTIONS+` which instructs Neo4j to commit a transaction after a number of rows.
The default is 1000 rows.

> To set a different number of rows for a single transaction, append `+OF X ROWS` to `TRANSACTIONS`, where `X` is the desired number of rows.

Reviewer 2: My take:
> `LOAD CSV` may timeout for files containing a significant number of rows (approaching hundreds of thousands or millions). For large files, it's recommended to split the import process in several lighter transactions through the clause xref:subqueries/subqueries-in-transactions.adoc[`CALL {...} IN TRANSACTIONS]`.

Some thoughts:
- don't just `recommend` a behavior, but say _why_ it matters. What behavior would I observe if I don't comply?
- `subqueries` is close to jargon here, as it is a somewhat advanced feature lots of people don't know about. All that they need to know is that they have to wrap their load csv call into another clause, then whether we call them subqueries, magical syntax, boosted load ... it doesn't matter. We can save them a foreign word if we can.
- `serialize` is not a good word, as it implies that the import runs in `parallel` without subqueries
- `memory overhead` is not the best, `memory footprint` is more accurate
- I'm torn whether `OF x ROWS` is of enough value to be brought up here. The more detail there is, the more quickly out of date it can get. The default `CALL {...} IN TRANSACTIONS` will work fine for >80% of readers, so we can leave the remaining <20% to go to the other page and figure out extra info. We can think about this, but in case I believe there should be an extra example.

Author: i'm fine with removing `OF x ROWS` in general - it's there if readers follow the link.
i included it because the page originally had an extra example for it :)

removing it poses some problems with the current example though (since 869 lines is < 1000, which is the default). that is secondary of course.
edit: unless we're ok with just using OF x ROWS without introducing it

[NOTE]
====
The query clause `CALL { ... } IN TRANSACTIONS` is only allowed in xref::introduction/cypher_neo4j.adoc#cypher-neo4j-transactions[implicit (auto-commit or `:auto`) transactions].
For more information, see xref:subqueries/subqueries-in-transactions.adoc[Subqueries in transactions].
====

> The file link:https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/persons.csv[_persons.csv_] contains a header line and a total of 869 lines with data about people:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The file link:https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/persons.csv[_persons.csv_] contains a header line and a total of 869 lines with data about people:
```
Here again, keep the example description all together and the example blocks unbroken.

.+persons.csv+
[source, csv, filename="persons.csv"]
----
person_tmdbId,bio,born,bornIn,died,person_imdbId,name,person_poster,person_url
3,"Legendary Hollywood Icon Harrison Ford was born on July 13, 1942 in Chicago, Illinois.   His family history includes a strong lineage of actors, radio personalities, and models.   Harrison attended public high school in Park Ridge, Illinois where he was a member of the school Radio Station WMTH.  Harrison worked as the lead voice for sports reporting at WMTH for several years.   Acting wasn’t a major interest to Ford until his junior year at Ripon College when he first took an acting class...",1942-07-13,"Chicago, Illinois, USA",,148,Harrison Ford,https://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w440_and_h660_face/5M7oN3sznp99hWYQ9sX0xheswWX.jpg,https://themoviedb.org/person/3
...
----

This file is more complex than the previous examples.

> For now, only the `name` and `born` columns are relevant.

Reviewer 2: These statements imply a "difficulty" in handling this csv. I don't think people whose csvs contain "a significant number of rows (approaching hundreds of thousands or millions)" will be scared by 868 rows and a few columns :P
Both sentences can go, but the example description may be expanded to say something like
> The file link:https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/persons.csv[_persons.csv_] contains a header line and a total of 869 lines with data about people. The example loads the `name` and `born` columns in transactions of 200 rows.

To split the processing into chunks of 200 lines per transaction, use the following query:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
CALL {
  LOAD CSV FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/persons.csv' AS row
  MERGE (p:Person)
  SET
  p.tmdbId = row.tmdbId,
  p.name = row.name,
  p.born = row.born

> } IN TRANSACTIONS OF 200 ROWS

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure about `SET`, but definitely swap `MERGE` with `CREATE`. The effect is the same but halves the number of queries the db needs to make.

Author: true. the graph academy uses MERGE to avoid duplication, i guess that's why i adopted it.

----

> With a total of five transactions, Neo4j creates 868 `Person` nodes and sets three properties on each of them: an ID, a name and information about when the person was born.

Reviewer 2: Focus on the piece at information at hand: we've shown several examples so far, plus we can expect _some_ cypher-competence at this point, so the fact that 3 properties are set is not the focus. The important point is 5 transactions. However, the queryresult talks for itself (move it close to the query), and I don't think there's a need to verbalize it.

Note that the query doesn't import the data from all columns.
It is valid to import only a part of the data.

> In some cases, this may be intended or feasible, depending on the data model prior to the import and what the goal is after the import.

Reviewer 2: The last sentence doesn't add anything. All together, they say "you may do X. There are valid reasons why you may want to do X." Unless people may have reasons that _they_ think are valid but that they are not (and sometimes it does happen), we don't need to be telling people that there may be good reasons for what they do, unless we elaborate on those reasons (and in this very simple example it's not needed). Only tell them how to do something.

.Result
[role="queryresult"]
----
+-------------------+
| No data returned. |
+-------------------+
Nodes created: 868
Properties set: 2604
Labels added: 868
Transactions committed: 5
----

[[load-csv-type-cast-csv-data]]

> === Typecast CSV data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Cast CSV columns to relevant Neo4j types
```

> All CSV data imported via `LOAD CSV` is string data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All CSV data imported via `LOAD CSV` is inserted as string properties.
```

> The file link:https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/persons.csv[_persons.csv_] contains several columns which are not best represented by a string:

Reviewer 2: As before, don't have your sentences broken by an example.
Talk in general before tackling this example, and move all text above, so that the explanation is all in one place: say why it matters to cast data, what's the advantages, link to relevant pages, and then show an example.

It may not look so, but this section is very important. This processing makes a big difference in the quality of the data that ends up in the db. There's also lists, points, maps. We don't need to cover everything, but it may be worth trying to craft another, more involved example.

Labels added: 4
----

`LOAD CSV` supports accessing CSV files via _HTTPS_, _HTTP_, and _FTP_.
`LOAD CSV` will follow _HTTP_ redirects but for security reasons it won't follow redirects which change the protocol, for example, if the redirect is going from _HTTPS_ to _HTTP_.

[NOTE]
====
The file location is relative to the import.
The config setting `server.directories.import` only applies to a local disc but doesn't to remote URLs.
====

`LOAD CSV` supports resources compressed with _gzip_ and _Deflate_.
Additionally `LOAD CSV` supports locally stored CSV files compressed with _ZIP_.

[[load-csv-large-amounts-of-data]]
=== Large amounts of data

> If the CSV file contains a significant number of rows approaching hundreds of thousands or millions, we recommend you to serialize the data processing and reduce memory overhead by doing so.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the CSV file contains a significant number of rows approaching hundreds of thousands or millions, it is recommended that you serialize the data processing and reduce memory overhead by doing so.
```
Avoid using _we_,

For more information, see xref:subqueries/subqueries-in-transactions.adoc[Subqueries in transactions].
====

The file link:https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/persons.csv[_persons.csv_] contains a header line and a total of 869 lines with data about people:

.+persons.csv+
[source, csv, filename="persons.csv"]
----
person_tmdbId,bio,born,bornIn,died,person_imdbId,name,person_poster,person_url
3,"Legendary Hollywood Icon Harrison Ford was born on July 13, 1942 in Chicago, Illinois.   His family history includes a strong lineage of actors, radio personalities, and models.   Harrison attended public high school in Park Ridge, Illinois where he was a member of the school Radio Station WMTH.  Harrison worked as the lead voice for sports reporting at WMTH for several years.   Acting wasn’t a major interest to Ford until his junior year at Ripon College when he first took an acting class...",1942-07-13,"Chicago, Illinois, USA",,148,Harrison Ford,https://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w440_and_h660_face/5M7oN3sznp99hWYQ9sX0xheswWX.jpg,https://themoviedb.org/person/3
...
----

> The file is more complex than the previous examples throughout this chapter.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This file is more complex than the previous examples.
```

For now, only the `name` and `born` columns are relevant.

> To split the processing into chunks of 200 lines per transaction, use the following query:

Reviewer 3: Motivate why you want to split it.

Author: tough one - it's mainly for example reasons :) i can be honest and just say that ...?
there's the general "limit memory usage" a bit further up as well

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
CALL {
  LOAD CSV FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/persons.csv' AS row
  MERGE (p:Person)
  SET
  p.tmdbId = row.tmdbId,
  p.name = row.name,
  p.born = row.born
} IN TRANSACTIONS OF 200 ROWS
----

With a total of five transactions, Neo4j creates 868 `Person` nodes and sets three properties on each of them: an ID, a name and information about when the person was born.

Note that the query doesn't import the data from all columns.

> It's perfectly valid to just import a part of the data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is valid to import only a part of the data.
```

> In some cases, this may be intended or feasible, depending on the data model prior to the import and what the goal is after the import.

Reviewer 3: Feasible? This is a bit unclear.

Author: clarified a bit

.Result
[role="queryresult"]
----
+-------------------+
| No data returned. |
+-------------------+
Nodes created: 868
Properties set: 2604
Labels added: 868
Transactions committed: 5
----

[[load-csv-type-cast-csv-data]]

> === Type cast CSV data

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
=== Typecast CSV data
```

All CSV data imported via `LOAD CSV` is string data.
The file link:https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/persons.csv[_persons.csv_] contains several columns which are not best represented by a string:

.+persons.csv+
[source, csv, filename="persons.csv"]
----
person_tmdbId,bio,born,bornIn,died,person_imdbId,name,person_poster,person_url
3,"Legendary Hollywood Icon Harrison Ford was born on July 13, 1942 in Chicago, Illinois.   His family history includes a strong lineage of actors, radio personalities, and models.   Harrison attended public high school in Park Ridge, Illinois where he was a member of the school Radio Station WMTH.  Harrison worked as the lead voice for sports reporting at WMTH for several years.   Acting wasn’t a major interest to Ford until his junior year at Ripon College when he first took an acting class...",1942-07-13,"Chicago, Illinois, USA",,148,Harrison Ford,https://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w440_and_h660_face/5M7oN3sznp99hWYQ9sX0xheswWX.jpg,https://themoviedb.org/person/3
...
----

Values in the column `person_tmdbId` are integers, while values in the `born` column are dates.

> To type-cast the values while importing data, use the functions `toInteger()` and `date()`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To type cast the values while importing data, use the functions `toInteger()` and `date()`:
```

The connection between actors and movies is established by the properties `person_tmdbId` and `movieId`:

.+movies.csv+
[source, csv, filename="acted_in.csv"]
----
movieId,person_tmdbId,role
1,12899,Slinky Dog (voice)
1,12898,Buzz Lightyear (voice)
...
----

_movies.csv_ also holds the role the actor played in the movie.

The data are deliberately modeled like they could have been exported from a relational database.
The table represented by _acted_in.csv_ acts as a look-up table combining the primary keys, the IDs, of the tables represented by _persons.csv_ and _movies.csv_.

The following query creates the `ACTED_IN` relationship:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/acted_in.csv' AS row
MATCH (p:Person {tmdbId: toInteger(row.person_tmdbId)})
MATCH (m:Movie {movieId: toInteger(row.movieId)})
MERGE (p)-[r:ACTED_IN]->(m)
SET r.role = row.role
----

.Result
[role="queryresult"]
----
+-------------------+
| No data returned. |
+-------------------+
Relationships created: 372
Properties set: 372
----

[[load-csv-best-practices]]
== Best practices

[[load-csv-create-constraints]]

> === Create CONSTRAINTS

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Create constraints
```
I get you want people to create them, but :shushing_face:

The CSV files _persons.csv_ and _movies.csv_ processed in <<load-csv-type-cast-csv-data>>, <<load-csv-split-list-values>> and <<load-csv-create-relationships>> both contain IDs for the created nodes.
They uniquely identify a person or a movie node but so far there is no check if they are truly unique.

> Neo4j's concept of constraints is a way of enforcing uniqueness.

Reviewer 2: There's no such thing as `true uniqueness` and `quasi uniqueness`: either it's unique or not. Move here the explanation of why you may want constraints and what are the consequences of having them or not.

To create link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/{page-version}/constraints/examples/#constraints-examples-node-uniqueness[node property uniqueness constraints] for the two IDs:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
CREATE CONSTRAINT Person_tmdbId IF NOT EXISTS
FOR (p:Person)
REQUIRE p.tmdbId IS UNIQUE

CREATE CONSTRAINT Movie_movieId IF NOT EXISTS
FOR (m:Movie)
REQUIRE m.movieId IS UNIQUE
----

.Result
[role="queryresult"]
----
+-------------------+
| No data returned. |
+-------------------+
Added 2 constraints.
----

With uniqueness constraints in place, trying to create a person node with an existing `tmdbId` or a movie node with an existing `movieId` raises an error and doesn't create the node.

Note that creating constraints after importing data is not recommended, since the creation of a constraint fails if there are nodes or relationship that would violate the constraint, see link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/{page-version}/constraints/examples/#constraints-fail-to-create-a-uniqueness-constraint-due-to-conflicting-nodes[Creating a constraint when there exist conflicting nodes will fail].

> Therefore, it is recommended to create constraints prior to importing data.

Reviewer 2: Dare to go beyond recommendations. If you want people to create constraints ahead of import, say "always create constraints ahead of import".

There are many more link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/{page-version}/constraints/[types of constraints].

[[load-csv-create-additional-node-labels]]
=== Create additional node labels

The `ACTED_IN` relationship created in <<load-csv-create-relationships>> implicitly defines actors as a subset of people in _persons.csv_.
To apply an additional actor node label where it is applicable, based on the relationship:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Person)-[:ACTED_IN]->()
WITH DISTINCT p SET p:Actor
----

.Result
[role="queryresult"]
----
+-------------------+
| No data returned. |
+-------------------+
Labels added: 104
----

By adding the `Actor` label to the relevant person nodes, queries which target the label rather than the relationship are quicker to return, see link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/{page-version}/appendix/tutorials/basic-query-tuning/[Basic query tuning].

[[load-csv-build-an-import-process]]

> === Build an import process

Reviewer 2: It's unclear what role this section play. Several remarks works more as fillers than actual information: for example, "You can always inspect nodes and relationships via `MATCH` and `RETURN`." doesn't say anything useful to somebody who knows how to do this already, but doesn't help those that are unsure how to put together a query to retrieve data, hence it doesn't play any role. 

However, there is value in the full example, so I would clean this section up and rename it to `A full example` or something like that, making the example the central part of it, with very little text surrounding it. It's then important that the example works as-is (right now it doesn't).

Generally speaking, data import is a process where the first attempts might not immediately succeed.
You can start with a basic import query, build upon it, and increase its complexity.

A couple of techniques can facilitate the trial and error process towards data import via `LOAD CSV`.
While working towards `LOAD CSV` queries which satisfy your requirements for data import and data modeling, it is useful to keep track of what you're doing, clean up intermediate steps and reproduce easily what you achieved so far.

You can always inspect nodes and relationships via `MATCH` and `RETURN`.

Similarly, you can reset all data by running a series of DELETE and DROP queries:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Person) DETACH DELETE p;
MATCH (m:Movie) DETACH DELETE m;

DROP CONSTRAINT Person_tmdbId IF EXISTS;
DROP CONSTRAINT Movie_movieId IF EXISTS;
----

.Result
[role="queryresult"]
----
+-------------------+
| No data returned. |
+-------------------+
Deleted 961 nodes, deleted 372 relationships.
Removed 2 constraints.
----

> Note that you can combine multiple queries with a semicolon `;`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
This is true and false. It's not a cypher feature: it's a _cypher-shell_ and _Browser_ feature. It won't work through drivers for example though. It's true that cypher docs sometimes group many cypher statements in a single block, but let's not be explicit that this is a _feature_.
Also, a cypher `query` is a whole string you submit to the database; when you split that by semicolons, you get cypher `statements`.

MERGE (m:Movie)
SET
m.movieId = toInteger(row.movieId),
m.title = row.title,
m.imdbId = toInteger(row.movie_imdbId),
m.languages = split(row.languages, '|'),
m.genres = split(row.genres, '|');

LOAD CSV FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/acted_in.csv' AS row
MATCH (p:Person {tmdbId: toInteger(row.person_tmdbId)})
MATCH (m:Movie {movieId: toInteger(row.movieId)})
MERGE (p)-[r:ACTED_IN]->(m)
SET r.role = row.role;

MATCH (p:Person)-[:ACTED_IN]->()
WITH DISTINCT p SET p:Actor;
----

.Result
[role="queryresult"]
----
+-------------------+
| No data returned. |
+-------------------+
Added 2 constraints.
Nodes created: 961
Relationships created: 372
Properties set: 3441
Labels added: 1065
----

The example above combines the queries from sections <<load-csv-type-cast-csv-data>>, <<load-csv-split-list-values>>, <<load-csv-create-relationships>>, <<load-csv-create-constraints>> and <<load-csv-create-additional-node-labels>>.

You can run this query at any point to refresh the database with the latest data.
A single process to build your graph provides a consistent mechanism to test your import.

[[load-csv-further-reading]]

> == Further reading

Reviewer 2: These are valuable pointers, but I find them a bit thrown there and not elaborated upon. I think we should incorporate them in the main content, where it's relevant to bring them up, or design new sections around them.

link:https://neo4j.com/docs/getting-started/data-modeling/guide-data-modeling/[Data modeling] considerations are relevant for the data import via `LOAD CSV` as well.

> The imported data may not be optimized for graph database usage and it may be worthwhile to think about what options there are to make full use of Neo4j's feature set.

Reviewer 2: It is almost a fact of life that any dump coming from a relational database is NOT going to be optimized for property graphs, and there is gain in reasoning on the data model ahead of the import, so dare to say so.

Furthermore, nodes and relationshops in the resulting graph database can be made more accessible and supportive towards query optimization.

> link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/{page-version}/indexes/[Node indexes] can vastly speed up queries. Also see link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/{page-version}/appendix/tutorials/basic-query-tuning/[Basic query tuning].

Reviewer 2: Entities are not _less accessible_ without indexes (you can still access them all), and _supportive towards query optimization_ is a weird phrasing. Also, it's not just _node_ indexes that have an impact. The real fact is that "Creating indexes on frequently queries entities has a huge performance impact on query times." You can phrase it a bit differently, but don't embellish it too much :)

> Finally, link:https://neo4j.com/docs/getting-started/data-import/csv-import/[Importing CSV data into Neo4j] covers some more aspects of working with CSV files without the heavy focus on Cypher's `LOAD CSV` clause.

Reviewer 2: There's a LOT of valuable content there that we should move here and remove from there. The whole optimization stuff is valuable! Also the last example block shows good sanity checks one can make ahead of import.

Reviewer 3: I agree and would also advise against linking to the Getting Started guide at all. If there is important content there, take it from there and stick it into whatever section in this manual it belongs.

Author: added various sections from there

2,Jumanji,65000000.0,USA,113497,6.9,198355,English|French,"When two kids find and play a magical board game, they release a man trapped for decades in it and a host of dangers that can only be stopped by finishing the game.",https://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w440_and_h660_face/vgpXmVaVyUL7GGiDeiK1mKEKzcX.jpg,1995-12-15,262797249.0,104,8844,https://themoviedb.org/movie/8844,1995,Adventure|Children|Fantasy
...
----

Both lists are separated by the character `|`.
Use the `split()` function to separate the single values and create a list while importing the data:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/movies.csv' AS row
MERGE (m:Movie)
SET
m.movieId = toInteger(row.movieId),
m.title = row.title,
m.imdbId = toInteger(row.movie_imdbId),
m.languages = split(row.languages, '|'),
m.genres = split(row.genres, '|')
----

.Result
[role="queryresult"]
----
+-------------------+
| No data returned. |
+-------------------+
Nodes created: 93
Properties set: 465
Labels added: 93
----

> Also see link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/{page-version}/functions/string/[String functions] for more options to work with string data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
See also link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/{page-version}/functions/string/[String functions] for more options to work with string data.
```

[[load-csv-create-relationships]]
=== Create relationships

The next query builds upon the person and movie nodes created in <<load-csv-type-cast-csv-data>> and <<load-csv-split-list-values>>.
It makes use of the additional CSV file link:https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/acted_in.csv[_acted_in.csv_].

> _acted_in.csv_ contains data about the relationship between actors and the movies they acted in.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The _acted_in.csv_ file contains data about the relationship between actors and the movies they acted in.
```

The connection between actors and movies is established by the properties `person_tmdbId` and `movieId`:

.+movies.csv+
[source, csv, filename="acted_in.csv"]
----
movieId,person_tmdbId,role
1,12899,Slinky Dog (voice)
1,12898,Buzz Lightyear (voice)
...
----

_movies.csv_ also holds the role the actor played in the movie.

The data are deliberately modeled like they could have been exported from a relational database.
The table represented by _acted_in.csv_ acts as a look-up table combining the primary keys, the IDs, of the tables represented by _persons.csv_ and _movies.csv_.

The following query creates the `ACTED_IN` relationship:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/acted_in.csv' AS row
MATCH (p:Person {tmdbId: toInteger(row.person_tmdbId)})
MATCH (m:Movie {movieId: toInteger(row.movieId)})
MERGE (p)-[r:ACTED_IN]->(m)
SET r.role = row.role
----

.Result
[role="queryresult"]
----
+-------------------+
| No data returned. |
+-------------------+
Relationships created: 372
Properties set: 372
----

[[load-csv-best-practices]]
== Best practices

> This section summarizes some best practices while using `LOAD CSV`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

[[load-csv-create-constraints]]
=== Create CONSTRAINTS

The CSV files _persons.csv_ and _movies.csv_ processed in <<load-csv-type-cast-csv-data>>, <<load-csv-split-list-values>> and <<load-csv-create-relationships>> both contain IDs for the created nodes.
They uniquely identify a person or a movie node but so far there is no check if they are truly unique.
Neo4j's concept of constraints is a way of enforcing uniqueness.

To create link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/{page-version}/constraints/examples/#constraints-examples-node-uniqueness[node property uniqueness constraints] for the two IDs:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
CREATE CONSTRAINT Person_tmdbId IF NOT EXISTS
FOR (p:Person)
REQUIRE p.tmdbId IS UNIQUE

CREATE CONSTRAINT Movie_movieId IF NOT EXISTS
FOR (m:Movie)
REQUIRE m.movieId IS UNIQUE
----

.Result
[role="queryresult"]
----
+-------------------+
| No data returned. |
+-------------------+
Added 2 constraints.
----

> Now that there are uniqueness constraints, trying to create a person node with an existing `tmdbId` or a movie node with an existing `movieId` raises an error and doesn't create the node.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With uniqueness constraints in place, trying to create a person node with an existing `tmdbId` or a movie node with an existing `movieId` raises an error and doesn't create the node.
```

> Note that creating constraints after importing data is risky, since the creation of a constraint fails if there are nodes or relationship that would violate the constraint, see link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/{page-version}/constraints/examples/#constraints-fail-to-create-a-uniqueness-constraint-due-to-conflicting-nodes[Creating a constraint when there exist conflicting nodes will fail].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that creating constraints after importing data is not recommended, since the creation of a constraint fails if there are nodes or relationship that would violate the constraint, see link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/{page-version}/constraints/examples/#constraints-fail-to-create-a-uniqueness-constraint-due-to-conflicting-nodes[Creating a constraint when there exist conflicting nodes will fail].
```

> Therefore, it is recommend to create constraints prior to importing data.

Author: ```suggestion
Therefore, it is recommended to create constraints prior to importing data.
```

There are many more link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/{page-version}/constraints/[types of constraints].

[[load-csv-create-additional-node-labels]]
=== Create additional node labels

The `ACTED_IN` relationship created in <<load-csv-create-relationships>> implicitly defines actors as a subset of people in _persons.csv_.
To apply an additional actor node label where it is applicable, based on the relationship:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Person)-[:ACTED_IN]->()
WITH DISTINCT p SET p:Actor
----

.Result
[role="queryresult"]
----
+-------------------+
| No data returned. |
+-------------------+
Labels added: 104
----

By adding the `Actor` label to the relevant person nodes, queries which target the label rather than the relationship are quicker to return, see link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/{page-version}/appendix/tutorials/basic-query-tuning/[Basic query tuning].

[[load-csv-build-an-import-process]]
=== Build an import process

Generally speaking, data import is a process where the first attempts might not immediately succeed.

> It's perfectly valid to start out with a basic import query, build upon it and increase its complexity.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can start with a basic import query, build upon it, and increase its complexity.
```

edit: added "start"

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV FROM 'file:///artists.csv' AS row
RETURN linenumber() AS number, row
----

.Result
[source, role="queryresult"]
----

> +---------------------------------------+

Reviewer: We tend to create tables for the Result columns in Cypher Manual (something I am beginning to reconsider), but for now, maybe we can stick to how other pages do it and then consider a more holistic change later. 

```suggestion
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2m"]
|===
| number | row

| 1 | ["1","ABBA","1992"]
| 2 | ["2","Roxette","1986"]
| 3 | ["3","Europe","1979"]
| 4 | ["4","The Cardigans","1992"]

2+d|Rows: 4
|===
```

+------------------------------------------+
1 row
----
====

[TIP]
`file()` always returns a local path, even when loading remote CSV files.
For remote resources, `file()` returns the temporary local path it was downloaded to.

== CSV file format

The CSV file format and `LOAD CSV` interact as follows:

* the file character encoding must be UTF-8;
* the line terminator is system dependent (`\n` for Unix and `\r\n` for Windows);
* the default field delimiter is `,`. Change it with the option `FIELDTERMINATOR`;
* CSV files may contain quoted string values, and the quotes are dropped when `LOAD CSV` reads the data;
* if `dbms.import.csv.legacy_quote_escaping` is set to the default value of `true`, `\` is used as an escape character;

> * a double quote must be in a quoted string and escaped, with either the escape character or a second double quote.

Reviewer: Bullet point lists should be capitalized and each point should end with a full stop.

- *Inconsistent headers* -- The CSV header may be inconsistent with the data.
It can be missing, have too many columns or have a different delimiter.
Verify that the header matches the data in the file.
Adjust the formatting, delimiters or columns.
- *Extra or missing quotes* -- Standalone double or single quotes in the middle of non-quoted text or non-escaped quotes in quoted text can cause issues reading the file.
Either escape or remove stray quotes.
See <<Quotes escaping>>.
- *Special or newline characters* -- When dealing with special characters in a file, ensure they are quoted or remove them.
- *Inconsistent line breaks* -- Ensure line breaks are consistent throughout your file.
- *Binary zeros, BOM byte order mark and other non-text characters* -- Unusual characters or tool-specific formatting are sometimes hidden in application tools, but become apparent in plain-text editors.
If you come across these types of characters in your file, either remove them or use Cypher's xref:functions/string.adoc#functions-normalize[normalize function].

==== Inspect source files ahead of import

> Before actually importing data into the database, you can use `LOAD CSV` to inspect a source file and get an idea of what form the imported data is going to have.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before importing data into the database, you can use `LOAD CSV` to inspect a source file and get an idea of what form the imported data is going to have.
```

* the file character encoding must be UTF-8;
* the line terminator is system dependent (`\n` for Unix and `\r\n` for Windows);
* the default field delimiter is `,`. Change it with the option `FIELDTERMINATOR`;
* CSV files may contain quoted string values, and the quotes are dropped when `LOAD CSV` reads the data;
* if `dbms.import.csv.legacy_quote_escaping` is set to the default value of `true`, `\` is used as an escape character;
* a double quote must be in a quoted string and escaped, with either the escape character or a second double quote.

=== Headers

If the CSV file starts with a header row containing column names, each import row in the file acts as a map instead of an array.

You must indicate the presence of the header row by adding `WITH HEADERS` to the query.
You can then access specific fields by their corresponding column name.

.Parsing a CSV as a list of maps
====
.artists-with-headers.csv
[source, csv, filename="artists-with-headers.csv"]
----
Id,Name,Year
1,ABBA,1992
2,Roxette,1986
3,Europe,1979
4,The Cardigans,1992
----

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM 'file:///artists-with-headers.csv' AS row

> MERGE (:Artist {name: row.Name, year: toInteger(row.Year)})

Reviewer 4: I think it would be more useful to RETURN so the user sees the result

Author: added a return line

If quoted strings need to contain quote characters `"`, there are two ways to escape them:

1. *Double quotes* -- Use another quote `"` to escape a quote (for example, the CSV encoding of the string `The "Symbol"` is `"The ""Symbol"""`).
2. *Prefix with backslash `\`* -- If the configuration setting `dbms.import.csv.legacy_quote_escaping` is set to `true` (the default value), `\` works as the escape character for quotes (for example, the CSV encoding of the string `The "Symbol"` is `"The {backslash}"Symbol{backslash}""`).

.Import a CSV with double-quotes escaping
====
.artists-with-escaped-quotes.csv
[source, csv, filename="artists-with-escaped-quotes.csv"]
----
"1","The ""Symbol""","1992"
"1","The \"Symbol\"","1992"
----

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV FROM 'file:///artists-with-escaped-quotes.csv' AS row
MERGE (a:Artist {name: row[1], year: toInteger(row[2])})
RETURN
  a.name AS name,
  a.year AS year,
  size(a.name) AS size
----

.Result
[source, role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="3*<m"]
|===
| name | year | size
| 'The "Symbol"' | 1992 | 12
| 'The "Symbol"' | 1992 | 12
3+d| Nodes created: 2 +
Properties set: 4 +
Labels added: 1
|===

> Note that `name` is a string, as it is wrapped in single quotes in the output.

Reviewer 4: Whether it is wrapped in single or double quotes is interface dependent, so saying it is a string because it is wrapped in single quotes isn't 100% true.

Author: rephrased

The third column outputs the string length as `size`.
The length only counts what is between the single quotes, but not the quotes themselves.

====

=== Check source data quality

In case of a failed import, there are some elements to check to ensure the source file is not corrupted.

- *Inconsistent headers* -- The CSV header may be inconsistent with the data.
It can be missing, have too many columns or have a different delimiter.
Verify that the header matches the data in the file.
Adjust the formatting, delimiters or columns.
- *Extra or missing quotes* -- Standalone double or single quotes in the middle of non-quoted text or non-escaped quotes in quoted text can cause issues reading the file.
Either escape or remove stray quotes.
See <<Quotes escaping>>.
- *Special or newline characters* -- When dealing with special characters in a file, ensure they are quoted or remove them.
- *Inconsistent line breaks* -- Ensure line breaks are consistent throughout your file.

> We recommend the Unix style for compatibility with Linux systems. (and is compatible with windows? does it even matter, is not up to the jvm to do the parsing, which is system agnostic?)

Author: ```suggestion
We recommend the Unix style for compatibility with Linux systems.
```
@gem-neo4j forwarding the question:
is it compatible with windows? does it even matter, is it not up to the jvm to do the parsing, which is system agnostic?

Reviewer 4: Well Windows requires /r/n afaik. I am not 100% on how each system works, but looking at the code we accept the same as Cypher, so either /n, /r or /r/n. Maybe just don't recommend anything? saying they should be consistent is a nice enough tip I think

Author: ok, removing the recommendation

> - *Binary zeros, BOM byte order mark and other non-text characters* -- Unusual characters or tool-specific formatting are sometimes hidden in application tools, but become apparent in plain-text editors.

Reviewer 4: We have NORMALIZE() functions now, could be something to recommend using as well :)

Author: added a link

If you come across these types of characters in your file, remove them entirely.

==== Inspect source files ahead of import

Before actually importing data into the database, you can use `LOAD CSV` to inspect a source file and get an idea of what form the imported data is going to have.

.Inspect CSV files with `LOAD CSV`
====
[source, cypher]
----
// Assert correct line count
LOAD CSV FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/persons.csv' AS line
RETURN count(*);

// Check first 5 line-sample with header-mapping
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/persons.csv' AS line
RETURN line
LIMIT 5;
----

.Result

> [source, role="queryresult"]

Reviewer 4: This is not the correct return box for the above?

Author: true - i'll have another look at returns as a separate step

----
+-------------------+
| No data returned. |
+-------------------+
Nodes created: 4
Properties set: 8
Labels added: 4
----

====

> == Performance recommendations

Reviewer 4: Where has all this info come from? It is in varying degrees of intensity for what a user needs to understand to import data, I would almost more expect some of this as a blog post

Author: it's mainly from the getting started guide on LOAD CSV i think:
https://neo4j.com/docs/getting-started/data-import/csv-import/#optimizing-load-csv

the books.csv is from the graph academy course

Author: commented out the section on performance recommendations for now

.Create indexes on movie ID and title
[source, cypher]
----
CREATE INDEX movie_imdbId FOR (m:Movie) ON (m.movie_imdbId) IF NOT EXISTS;
CREATE INDEX movie_title FOR (m:Movie) ON (m.title) IF NOT EXISTS;
----

For more information on the role of indexes, see xref:indexes/search-performance-indexes/using-indexes.adoc[].

=== Separate creation of nodes and relationships

It is more efficient to create _all_ nodes first, and then add relationships with a second pass.

.Comparison: import nodes and relationships together VS splitting them
====
.https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/books.csv
[source, csv]
----
id,title,author,publication_year,genre,rating,still_in_print,last_purchased
19515,The Heights,Anne Conrad,2012,Comedy,5,true,2023/4/12 8:17:00
39913,Starship Ghost,Michael Tyler,1985,Science Fiction|Horror,4.2,false,2022/01/16 17:15:56
60980,The Death Proxy,Tim Brown,2002,Horror,2.1,true,2023/11/26 8:34:26
18793,Chocolate Timeline,Mary R. Robb,1924,Romance,3.5,false,2022/9/17 14:23:45
67162,Stories of Three,Eleanor Link,2022,Romance|Comedy,2,true,2023/03/12 16:01:23
25987,Route Down Below,Tim Brown,2006,Horror,4.1,true,2023/09/24 15:34:18
----

> .Bad practice -- Create nodes and relationships at once

Reviewer 4: This is pretty harsh. A user may not have enough data to import to warrant splitting it up, there must be a threshold where this is fine to do. Also there must be overhead with setting up the connection etc. Same with running two separate queries - there is going to be a point where the amount of data versus setting up a db connection has an effect on the "badness" of splitting

Author: removed "Good/bad practice" and rephrased slightly to make it less harsh

Depending on the exact shape of your Cypher query, the database may have to craft a query plan that contains the link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/current/planning-and-tuning/operators/operators-detail/#query-plan-eager[`Eager`] operator.
You may discover if this is the case by link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/current/query-tuning/#how-do-i-profile-a-query[profiling your queries], and attempt tweaking them to avoid it in case.

=== Database heap and memory

To help handle larger volumes of transactions, there are a few memory configuration settings you can tweak:

* link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/configuration/configuration-settings/#config_server.memory.heap.initial_size[`server.memory.heap.initial_size`] and link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/configuration/configuration-settings/#config_server.memory.heap.max_size[`server.memory.heap.max_size`]: set to at least 4G.
* link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/configuration/configuration-settings/#config_server.memory.pagecache.size[`server.memory.pagecache.size`]: ideally, a value large enough to keep the whole database in memory.

> As a rule of thumb, you can create or update one million records in a single transaction per 2 GB of heap.

Author: @gem-neo4j can you verify this statement? (it stems from the getting started guide)

Reviewer 4: I have no clue 🙈

Author: commented out for now

m.title = row.title,
m.imdbId = toInteger(row.movie_imdbId),
m.languages = split(row.languages, '|'),
m.genres = split(row.genres, '|');

// Create relationships
LOAD CSV FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/acted_in.csv' AS row
MATCH (p:Person {tmdbId: toInteger(row.person_tmdbId)})
MATCH (m:Movie {movieId: toInteger(row.movieId)})
MERGE (p)-[r:ACTED_IN]->(m)
SET r.role = row.role;

// Set additional node label
MATCH (p:Person)-[:ACTED_IN]->()
WITH DISTINCT p SET p:Actor;
----

.Result
[source, role="queryresult"]
----
+-------------------+
| No data returned. |
+-------------------+
Added 2 constraints.
Nodes created: 961
Relationships created: 372
Properties set: 3441
Labels added: 1065
----
====

== Other ways of importing data

There are a few other tools to get CSV data into Neo4j.

1. *The link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/tools/neo4j-admin/neo4j-admin-import/[`neo4j-admin database import`] command* is the most efficient way of importing large CSV files.
2. Use a link:https://neo4j.com/docs/create-applications/[*language library*] to parse CSV data and run creation Cypher queries against a Neo4j database.

> 3. link:https://neo4j.com/labs/apoc/[APOC^]: Awesome Procedures on Cypher.

Reviewer 4: Please do not link APOC Extended in our official docs for Cypher 😭 Only Core, and even then, I would err on the side of "is it really really needed?"

Author: removed

Reviewer: Yes, I would remove any links to APOC here.

You may discover if this is the case by link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/current/query-tuning/#how-do-i-profile-a-query[profiling your queries], and attempt tweaking them to avoid it in case.

=== Database heap and memory

To help handle larger volumes of transactions, there are a few memory configuration settings you can tweak:

* link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/configuration/configuration-settings/#config_server.memory.heap.initial_size[`server.memory.heap.initial_size`] and link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/configuration/configuration-settings/#config_server.memory.heap.max_size[`server.memory.heap.max_size`]: set to at least 4G.
* link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/configuration/configuration-settings/#config_server.memory.pagecache.size[`server.memory.pagecache.size`]: ideally, a value large enough to keep the whole database in memory.

// As a rule of thumb, you can create or update one million records in a single transaction per 2 GB of heap.

> == A full example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Example
```

> .A full example

Reviewer: Either rename it as something different or remove.

```suggestion
```

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM 'file:///artists-with-headers.csv' AS row
MERGE (a:Artist {name: row.Name, year: toInteger(row.Year)})

> RETURN a;

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
RETURN a
```

Write the encoding with four digits: for example, `{backslash}u003B` is equivalent to `;` (semicolon).

=== Quotes escaping

Quoted `STRING` values are allowed in the CSV file and the quotes are dropped when `LOAD CSV` reads the data.
If quoted `STRING` values must contain quote characters `"`, there are two ways to escape them:

1. *Double quotes* -- Use another quote `"` to escape a quote (for example, the CSV encoding of the `STRING` `The "Symbol"` is `"The ""Symbol"""`).
2. *Prefix with backslash `\`* -- If the configuration setting `dbms.import.csv.legacy_quote_escaping` is set to `true` (the default value), `\` works as the escape character for quotes (for example, the CSV encoding of the `STRING` `The "Symbol"` is `"The {backslash}"Symbol{backslash}""`).

.Import a CSV with double-quotes escaping
====
.artists-with-escaped-quotes.csv
[source, csv, filename="artists-with-escaped-quotes.csv"]
----
"1","The ""Symbol""","1992"
"2","The \"Symbol\"","1992"
----

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV FROM 'file:///artists-with-escaped-quotes.csv' AS row
MERGE (a:Artist {id: toInteger(row[0]), name: row[1], year: toInteger(row[2])})
RETURN

>   a.id AS ID,

Reviewer 4: ID capitalised looks strange with the other aliases to me

Author: changed to "id"

// Check first 5 line-sample with header-mapping
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/persons.csv' AS line
RETURN line.person_tmdbId, line.name
LIMIT 5;
----

.Result
[source, role="queryresult"]
----
+----------+
| count(*) |
+----------+
| 445      |
+----------+

1 row
ready to start consuming query after 3 ms, results consumed after another 62 ms
+--------------------------------------+
| line.person_tmdbId | line.name       |
+--------------------------------------+
| "3"                | "Harrison Ford" |
| "31"               | "Tom Hanks"     |
| "32"               | "Robin Wright"  |
| "35"               | "Sally Field"   |
| "48"               | "Sean Bean"     |
+--------------------------------------+

5 rows
ready to start consuming query after 41 ms, results consumed after another 12 ms
----
====

////
== Performance recommendations

=== Create and use indexes

xref:indexes/index.adoc[Indexes] can vastly speed up queries targeting the indexes entities.
Either before or after the import, create indexes on the labels and properties that you expect to query most often.

.Create indexes on movie ID and title
[source, cypher]
----

> CREATE INDEX movie_imdbId FOR (m:Movie) ON (m.movie_imdbId) IF NOT EXISTS;
> CREATE INDEX movie_title FOR (m:Movie) ON (m.title) IF NOT EXISTS;

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
CREATE INDEX movie_imdbId
FOR (m:Movie) ON (m.movie_imdbId) IF NOT EXISTS;

CREATE INDEX movie_title
FOR (m:Movie) ON (m.title) IF NOT EXISTS;
```

----

For more information on the role of indexes, see xref:indexes/search-performance-indexes/using-indexes.adoc[].

=== Separate creation of nodes and relationships

With increasing amounts of data, it is more efficient to create _all_ nodes first, and then add relationships with a second pass.

.Comparison: import nodes and relationships together VS splitting them
====
.https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/books.csv
[source, csv]
----
id,title,author,publication_year,genre,rating,still_in_print,last_purchased
19515,The Heights,Anne Conrad,2012,Comedy,5,true,2023/4/12 8:17:00
39913,Starship Ghost,Michael Tyler,1985,Science Fiction|Horror,4.2,false,2022/01/16 17:15:56
60980,The Death Proxy,Tim Brown,2002,Horror,2.1,true,2023/11/26 8:34:26
18793,Chocolate Timeline,Mary R. Robb,1924,Romance,3.5,false,2022/9/17 14:23:45
67162,Stories of Three,Eleanor Link,2022,Romance|Comedy,2,true,2023/03/12 16:01:23
25987,Route Down Below,Tim Brown,2006,Horror,4.1,true,2023/09/24 15:34:18
----

. Create nodes and relationships at once
[source, cypher]
----

> LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS
> FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/books.csv'
> AS row

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/books.csv' AS row
```

MERGE (b:Book {id: row.id})
SET b.title = row.title
MERGE (a:Author {name: row.author})
MERGE (a)-[:WROTE]->(b)
----

.Separate nodes and relationships creation
[source, cypher]
----
// Create `Book` nodes

> LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS
> FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/books.csv'
> AS row
> MERGE (b:Book {id: row.id})

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/books.csv' AS row
MERGE (b:Book {id: row.id})
```

SET b.title = row.title;

// Create `Author` nodes

> LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS
> FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/books.csv'
> AS row
> MERGE (a:Author {name: row.author});

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/books.csv' AS row
MERGE (a:Author {name: row.author});
```

// Create `WROTE` relationships

> LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS
> FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/books.csv'
> AS row

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/books.csv' AS row
```

=== Database heap and memory

To help handle larger volumes of transactions, there are a few memory configuration settings you can tweak:

* link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/configuration/configuration-settings/#config_server.memory.heap.initial_size[`server.memory.heap.initial_size`] and link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/configuration/configuration-settings/#config_server.memory.heap.max_size[`server.memory.heap.max_size`]: set to at least 4G.
* link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/configuration/configuration-settings/#config_server.memory.pagecache.size[`server.memory.pagecache.size`]: ideally, a value large enough to keep the whole database in memory.

// As a rule of thumb, you can create or update one million records in a single transaction per 2 GB of heap.
////

== Example

====

.Erase current database and import the full movie dataset
[source, cypher]
----
// Clear data
MATCH (n) DETACH DELETE n;

// Create constraints

> CREATE CONSTRAINT Person_tmdbId IF NOT EXISTS
> FOR (p:Person)
> REQUIRE p.tmdbId IS UNIQUE;

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
CREATE CONSTRAINT Person_tmdbId IF NOT EXISTS
FOR (p:Person) REQUIRE p.tmdbId IS UNIQUE;
```

> CREATE CONSTRAINT Movie_movieId IF NOT EXISTS
> FOR (m:Movie)
> REQUIRE m.movieId IS UNIQUE;

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
CREATE CONSTRAINT Movie_movieId IF NOT EXISTS
FOR (m:Movie) REQUIRE m.movieId IS UNIQUE;
```

// Create person nodes
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/persons.csv' AS row
MERGE (p:Person {tmdbId: toInteger(row.person_tmdbId)})
SET p.name = row.name, p.born = date(row.born);

// Create movie nodes
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/movies.csv' AS row
MERGE (m:Movie {id: toInteger(row.movieId)})

> SET m.title = row.title, m.imdbId = toInteger(row.movie_imdbId),
>     m.languages = split(row.languages, '|'), m.genres = split(row.genres, '|');

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
SET 
    m.title = row.title, 
    m.imdbId = toInteger(row.movie_imdbId),
    m.languages = split(row.languages, '|'), 
    m.genres = split(row.genres, '|');
```

// Create relationships
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/acted_in.csv' AS row
MATCH (p:Person {tmdbId: toInteger(row.person_tmdbId)})
MATCH (m:Movie {id: toInteger(row.movieId)})
MERGE (p)-[r:ACTED_IN]->(m)
SET r.role = row.role;

// Set additional node label
MATCH (p:Person)-[:ACTED_IN]->()

> WITH DISTINCT p SET p:Actor;

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
WITH DISTINCT p
SET p:Actor;
```

----

.Result
[source, role="queryresult"]
----

> Added 1 constraints
> Added 1 constraints

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Added 1 constraint.
Added 1 constraint.
```

Author: what about the following lines? (nodes, properties, labels)
i copied the output (well, parts of it) of cypher-shell - no periods at all, and plural for a single constraint. should i add a period to those lines as well?

Reviewer 4: Ah from Cypher Shell, I was looking at Browser. Are all of the outputs from Cypher shell? If so, leave it, and I'll make a card for cypher shell to fix its English :P

Author: yes, i ran all the queries through cypher-shell to double-check :) alright, thanks
